=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for In-Context Learning on Large Data
Jingang Qu 1 David Holzm¨uller 2 3 Ga¨el Varoquaux1 Marine Le Morvan 1
Abstract
The long-standing dominance of gradient-boosted
decision trees on tabular data is currently chal-
lenged by tabular foundation models using In-
Context Learning (ICL): setting the training data
as context for the test data and predicting in a
single forward pass without parameter updates.
While TabPFNv2 foundation model excels on
tables with up to 10K samples, its alternating
column- and row-wise attentions make handling
large training sets computationally prohibitive.
So, can ICL be effectively scaled and deliver a
benefit for larger tables? We introduce TabICL, a
tabular foundation model for classification, pre-
trained on synthetic datasets with up to 60K sam-
ples and capable of handling 500K samples on
affordable resources. This is enabled by a novel
two-stage architecture: a column-then-row atten-
tion mechanism to build fixed-dimensional em-
beddings of rows, followed by a transformer for
efficient ICL. Across 200 classification datasets
from the TALENT benchmark, TabICL is on
par with TabPFNv2 while being systematically
faster (up to 10 times), and significantly out-
performs all other approaches. On 53 datasets
with over 10K samples, TabICL surpasses both
TabPFNv2 and CatBoost, demonstrating the po-
tential of ICL for large data. Pretraining code,
inference code, and pre-trained models are avail-
able at https://github.com/soda-inria/tabicl.
1. Introduction
Tabular data, structured in rows and columns, is widely
used in industries like healthcare (Cartella et al., 2021)
and finance (Johnson et al., 2016), where tabular classifica-
tion problems underpin numerous real-world applications.
1SODA team, INRIA Saclay, France 2Sierra team, INRIA
Paris, France 3Ecole Normale Sup ´erieure, PSL Research Uni-
versity, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Jingang Qu <jin-
gang.qu@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
In other data modalities, foundation models – particularly
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Zhou et al., 2024) – have
significantly advanced the ability to tackle new tasks and
few-shot learning. This is largely due to their remarkable
in-context learning (ICL) capabilities (Brown et al., 2020),
which enable them to capture patterns in prompts without
requiring parameter updates. This success combined with
the pervasiveness of tables have spurred interest in tabular
foundation models (van Breugel & van der Schaar, 2024).
While LLMs are primarily designed to model natural lan-
guage, attempts to fine-tune them for tabular data have
emerged (Hegselmann et al., 2023; Fang et al., 2024, and
references therein). These efforts rely on table serialization,
which is the process of converting table rows into text or sen-
tences which can then be tokenized. Gardner et al. (2024)
fine-tuned Llama 3-8B on a corpus of serialized tables and
demonstrated the effectiveness of this approach compared
to tree-based models in the few-shot setting. However, such
language models-based approaches are limited by the size
of their context window to fit large serialized tables (e.g.
up to 32 or 64 shots in Gardner et al. 2024). Moreover, it
is unclear whether LLMs can effectively handle numerical
values (Thawani et al., 2021). Finally, as evidence shows
that LLMs are pretrained on many popular datasets (Bordt
et al., 2024), their evaluation on tabular prediction tasks
should also be conducted with care.
Taking a markedly different approach, Hollmann et al.
(2022) introduced TabPFN, a transformer-based tabular
foundation model for classification tasks, pretrained on syn-
thetic tabular datasets only. A key feature of TabPFN is
ICL with tables, which eliminates the need for tokenization
and enables efficient handling of small tables with up to 1K
samples and 100 features. The same authors then introduced
TabPFNv2 (Hollmann et al., 2025), an improved version
that significantly outperforms tree-based and neural network
competitors on small-to-medium datasets with up to 10K
samples and 500 features. The great promise of tabular ICL
has spurred a new line of research (see Section 2.3), yet the
quadratic cost of self-attention is a threat to the scalability of
all of these. TabPFNv2 uses a two-way attention mechanism
alternating between column-wise and row-wise attentions,
which limits its scalability for large datasets. In real-world
scenarios, where industrial datasets can contain millions of
samples (Rubachev et al., 2024), the high computational
1
arXiv:2502.05564v2  [cs.LG]  24 May 2025

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
and memory demands of TabPFNv2 hinder its practicality.
In this paper, we introduce TabICL, a scalable and efficient
tabular foundation model based on PFNs (M ¨uller et al.,
2024) and designed for classification tasks. Pretrained on
synthetic datasets up to 60K samples, TabICL can effec-
tively handle datasets up to 500K samples and 500 features,
significantly expanding the scalability of ICL for tables.
To accommodate tables of arbitrary sizes, TabICL treats
individual cells as fundamental units: each column is re-
garded as a set of cell values that capture feature-specific
distributions and semantics, while each row comprises in-
terdependent feature values. TabICL employs a two-stage
architecture to achieve efficient ICL for tabular data. First,
it encodes rows (excluding target labels) into dense vector
embeddings. Each embedding is designed to capture the
entire table information. This stage effectively collapses the
column dimension to substantially reduce computational
complexity and memory footprint for subsequent ICL. Sec-
ond, it combines these compact yet informative embeddings
with corresponding labels and then performs ICL. There-
fore, the core of TabICL lies in its embedding strategy of
the first stage, which is supposed to transform rows into
semantically rich embeddings.
In natural language, words often carry clear semantics and
are thus naturally associated to informative embeddings
(Mikolov et al., 2013). However, tabular data lacks such an
inherent structure: cell values can be ambiguous without
metadata such as column names or data types. To address
this challenge, TabICL adopts a well-constrained embed-
ding strategy combining (1) distribution-aware column-wise
embedding to capture statistical regularities within each col-
umn and (2) attention-based row-wise interaction to model
dependencies across columns, thereby constructing seman-
tically grounded representations for tabular data.
Feature embedding involves mapping scalar cell values into
high-dimensional vectors for each feature, serving as a crit-
ical factor in model performance (Gorishniy et al., 2022).
Since features often exhibit vastly different distributions,
previous approaches typically use feature-specific embed-
ding modules without parameter sharing, which, however,
limits cross-table transferability. In this work, we refor-
mulate feature embedding as a set-input problem, where a
permutation-invariant set of cell values acts as input, and
the output comprises corresponding one-to-one embeddings.
To achieve this, we leverage the Set Transformer (Lee et al.,
2019), a model specifically designed to process sets through
efficient induced self-attention. It excels in tasks such as
identifying extrema and counting unique elements, enabling
the discovery of distribution-related metadata within each
column and enhancing the ability to distinguish between
features of different data types.
The feature embeddings are then processed per-row by an-
other transformer, and aggregated into a single vector using
learnable [CLS] tokens. This effectively captures complex
feature interactions and accommodates a varying number of
features. Overall, this column-then-row attention-based em-
bedding achieves efficient sparse attention across all cells by
leveraging the column/row inherent structure of tabular data
as a strong inductive bias. Finally, the resulting row-wise
embeddings are handled by a final transformer for ICL.
In addition to the above innovations, we introduce further
improvements: (1) We refine TabPFN’s pretraining synthetic
datasets by adding a new tree-based data-generating model
to incorporate the inductive biases of tree-based models
(Grinsztajn et al., 2022; den Breejen et al., 2024; Grinsz-
tajn, 2024); (2) We adopt curriculum learning by scaling
the pretraining dataset size from 1K to 60K; (3) To address
classification problems with over 10 classes (the pretraining
limit), we use hierarchical classification (Silla & Freitas,
2011), breaking them into a hierarchical structure of sub-
problems with ≤ 10 classes. The increase in the number of
tasks is largely offset by the fast predictions of TabICL.
To summarize our contributions: (1) We present TabICL,
a novel scalable tabular foundation model for classifica-
tion tasks that can accommodate any number of samples,
features, and classes. In practice, TabICL handles up to
500K samples and 500 features with around 20GB of GPU
memory; (2) We introduce a distribution-aware feature em-
bedding approach that handles features with diverse prop-
erties in a unified manner, unlocking new possibilities for
cross-table transferability; (3) TabICL performs tasks in a
single forward pass and is orders of magnitude faster than
tabular methods requiring hyperparameter tuning while still
providing better performance in most cases. TabICL is also
consistently faster than TabPFNv2 (up to 10 times), with
efficiency gains increasing as dataset size grows; (4) We
evaluate TabICL on the TALENT benchmark (Ye et al.,
2025), comprising 200 classification datasets across various
domains and sizes (up to 150K samples). TabICL performs
comparably to TabPFNv2 on medium-sized datasets and
significantly outperforms all other methods. On the 53 large
datasets with over 10K samples, TabICL surpasses both
TabPFNv2 and CatBoost (Dorogush et al., 2018). These
results demonstrate the potential of ICL for large data.
2. Related Work
2.1. Foundation Models and In-Context Learning
In recent years, deep learning has been transformed by the
emergence of foundation models, which are pretrained on
massive, diverse datasets and serve as versatile backbones
for downstream tasks. These transformer-based models en-
able In-Context Learning (ICL): performing tasks by analyz-
2

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
Dataset-wise
In-Context Learning
  Transformer
+
Lookup
table
+
Lookup
table
+
Lookup
table
Row-wise
inter-feature
Interaction
Row 1 2 3 4 5
4
+
Transformer   
Rotary positional embedding
Columns (Features)Rows (Samples)
Training samples Test samples
Column-wise
inter-sample 
Embedding
 Transformer  
 
Figure 1. Architecture Overview of TabICL.First, column-wise embedding transforms each cell of the input table into an embedding
vector using a transformer TFcol (Section 3.2), producing E. Next, row-wise interaction prepends four trainable [CLS] tokens to E,
applies rotary positional encoding, and processes E row-by-row with a transformer TFrow. Concatenating the outputs of [CLS] tokens
yields the final row-wise embeddings H. Finally, dataset-wise ICL operates on H and uses a Transformer TFicl to predict the target labels
for the test set in a single forward pass. Overall, TabICL consists of three transformers.
ing prompts containing input-output pairs, without explicit
training or parameter updates. ICL operates as a form of on-
the-fly reasoning. The mechanism underlying ICL remains
elusive, with prevailing explanations framing it as implicit
Bayesian inference (Xie et al., 2022; M ¨uller et al., 2024),
gradient descent optimization (von Oswald et al., 2023), and
algorithmic learning (Garg et al., 2023).
2.2. Tabular Deep Learning Models
Gradient-boosted decision trees (GBDTs), such as CatBoost
and XGBoost (Chen & Guestrin, 2016), have long dom-
inated the tabular domain. However, growing efforts are
focused on developing deep learning models for tabular data.
Recent studies indicate a narrowing performance gap be-
tween GBDTs and tabular deep learning models (Ye et al.,
2024; Gorishniy et al., 2024).
As tabular deep learning improves, cross-table transferabil-
ity emerges as an important topic. Notable efforts in this
direction include XTab (Zhu et al., 2023) and CARTE (Kim
et al., 2024), which incorporate transferable components
that are typically shareable backbone networks and dataset-
specific components that require fine-tuning for each new
task. The advent of tabular foundation models can bring
new possibilities to cross-table learning, paving the way for
large-scale pretraining and transfer learning across tables.
2.3. Tabular Foundation Models
TabPFN, short for Tabular Prior-Data Fitted Network, is
a tabular foundation model. It is a transformer pretrained
on extensive synthetic datasets to perform tabular classifi-
cation tasks through ICL. TabPFN interprets ICL from a
Bayesian perspective as an approximate posterior predic-
tive distribution over synthetic datasets. Several variants
aim to enhance its scalability, including distilling training
data into a compact learned context via prompt tuning (Ma
et al., 2024b; Feuer et al., 2024), selecting the most rele-
vant subset of training data for each test sample (Xu et al.,
2024; Thomas et al., 2024; Koshil et al., 2024), replacing
quadratic with linear attention (Zeng et al., 2024), and gener-
ating small task-specific neural networks via an ICL-based
hypernetwork (M ¨uller et al., 2023). However, most vari-
ants do not structurally improve TabPFN but instead act as
prompt engineering to reduce in-context samples.
Several TabPFN variants try to improve the quality of pre-
training data, such as TabForestPFN (den Breejen et al.,
2024) incorporating tree-based synthetic datasets and Tab-
DPT (Ma et al., 2024a) using real-world datasets.
TabPFNv2 largely improves TabPFN in terms of both predic-
tion performance and scalability. Our new model, TabICL,
achieves comparable performance to TabPFNv2 while being
3

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
more scalable and computationally efficient. Appendix A
provides a systematic comparison between TabPFNv2 and
TabICL across architecture, pretraining, and scalability.
3. The TabICL Architecture
We consider a tabular classification task with an input space
X ∈ Rm and a target space Y ∈ [1, · · · , C]. Given a train-
ing dataset of input-output pairs Dtrain = {(x(i)
train, y(i)
train)}ntr
i=1
and test sample xtest, our goal is to predict the class proba-
bilities p(·|xtest, Dtrain).
3.1. High-level Structure: Embedding then ICL
TabICL comprises two key modules: a tabular embedding
module followed by an ICL module, with labels utilized
exclusively in the ICL module. The tabular embedding mod-
ule encodes table rows into dense vector representations
while taking the inherent column-row structure into account.
This module consists of two components: distribution-aware
column-wise embedding, which captures statistical charac-
teristics of individual columns, and context-aware row-wise
interaction, which models dependencies between features.
The ICL module subsequently processes both training and
test embeddings through a transformer, enabling the predic-
tion of the entire test set in a single forward pass through
ICL. The overall architecture is depicted in Figure 1.
3.2. Distribution-aware Column-wise Embedding
The column-wise embedding (or feature embedding) maps
each scalar cell in a column cj ∈ Rn into a d-dimensional
embedding. Unlike typical approaches that assign a separate
embedding module to each column (Gorishniy et al., 2022),
we embed all columns through a shareable Set Transformer
TFcol, as illustrated in Figure 2b and formulated as follows:
W, B = TFcol(cj) ∈ Rn×d (1)
ej = W ⊙ cj + B ∈ Rn×d (2)
Note that each cell in a column is assigned its own weight
and bias. Essentially, feature embedding can be framed as
a set-input problem, where TFcol serves as a hypernetwork
taking as input a permutation-invariant set of cell values and
generating distribution-aware weights and biases W and B.
The operations within TFcol unfold as follows:
U = Lin(c) ∈ Rn×d (3)
M = MAB1(VI , Utrain, Utrain) ∈ Rk×d (4)
V = MAB2(U, M, M) ∈ Rn×d (5)
W, B = Lin(V ) ∈ Rn×d (6)
ISAB
where Lin represents a linear layer, MAB denotes a multi-
head attention block, and IASB stands for induced self-
attention block (Figure 2a), introduced by (Lee et al., 2019).
A column c (omitting the subscript j for simplicity) is pro-
jected into a d-dimensional space ( d = 128 ) via a linear
layer, processed by ISAB consisting of MAB1 and MAB2,
and passed through linear layers to generate W and B.
ISAB reduces self-attention complexity to O(n) while pre-
serving the ability to capture global information through a
two-stage attention mechanism. In MAB1, inducing vectors
VI act as queries and attend to training samples Utrain to
generate induced representations M. In MAB2, inputs U
(including both training and test samples) serve as queries
and attend back to M, enabling global information to prop-
agate across all training samples. We use k = 128 inducing
vectors, 4 attention heads in the MABs, and 3 ISAB blocks
(only one ISAB block is shown in Equations (4) and (5) for
clarity). Crucially, only train samples serve as keys and val-
ues in MAB1. This ensures that the outputs of ISAB depend
solely on training data, thereby preventing data leakage.
To get insights into the information captured in the learned
feature embeddings, we visualize M ∈ Rk×d (Equation (4))
the output of the final ISAB block of TFcol. We summarize
M by summing along the first dimension (i.e., aggregating
the induced representations of all inducing vectors) to obtain
a single vector per column, and then apply Principal Com-
ponent Analysis. Figure 3 reveals that columns with similar
skewness (resp. kurtosis) tend to cluster together, i.e., non-
symmetric distributions are differentiated from symmetrical
ones (Figure 3 left), and heavy-tailed distributions are dif-
ferentiated from light-tailed ones. This suggests that TFcol
encodes distributional properties in a structured manner,
and cells in a column are probably embedded to reflect their
statistical role (e.g., min, max, mean, mode). Therefore,
the learned feature embeddings should distinguish features
based on their unique distributional properties, effectively
serving as feature identifiers. This contrasts with methods
that rely on semantic column names (Kim et al., 2024) or
learn feature identifier vectors (Kossen et al., 2021).
3.3. Context-aware Row-wise Interaction
After obtaining all feature embeddings E = [e1, · · · , em] ∈
Rn×m×d, a 3-layer transformer with 8 attention heads, de-
noted by TFrow, processes E for inter-feature interactions.
To aggregate the embeddings into a single vector, four learn-
able [CLS] tokens are prepended to each row ofE, and their
final outputs are concatenated together. We use four tokens
to provide richer representations with a total embedding
size of 4 × d = 512 for subsequent ICL, while maintaining
a lower embedding size ( d = 128 ) for TFcol and TFrow to
reduce memory consumption.
We experimentally observed that TFrow can suffer from a
representation collapse issue. As mentioned earlier, features
are identified by their distributional properties after column-
wise embedding. Consequently, features originating from
4

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
Inducingvectors
Induced self-attention block (ISAB)
Multi
head
attn
Feed
Forward
block
Multi-head attention block (MAB)
Key
Value
Query
(a) Efficient induced self-attention
Column 
ISAB
Set Transformer  
Lin
Lin
Lin (b) Column-wise inter-sample embedding
Figure 2. The distribution-aware column-wise embedding block in TabICL.The overall structure (right) relies on the induced self-
attention block (middle) that employs two multi-head attention blocks (left) to process incoming embeddings.
−1 0 1
skewness
0 5
kurtosis
Figure 3. Learned column-wise embeddings encode statistical
properties of feature distributions. Visualization of these em-
beddings projected onto their first two principal components for
40,000 features from synthetic datasets.
similar distributions thus become less distinguishable. In
the extreme case where all features are drawn from the same
distribution, TFrow using the vanilla permutation-invariant
self-attention cannot differentiate a sample from any of its
column-permuted versions, leading to nearly identical repre-
sentations for originally distinct samples, i.e., representation
collapse. This phenomenon is exemplified by thebalance
scale dataset (Siegler, 1976), as shown in Figure 4. In
this dataset, all features follow the same discrete distribution
with only 5 possible values, making collapse highly prob-
able. After processing with TFrow, we observe that many
samples collapse to the same representation (rightmost plot),
despite being originally distinct (leftmost plot).
A similar issue of representation collapse was reported in
TabPFNv2. To mitigate this, Hollmann et al. (2025) in-
troduced random feature identifier vectors for each feature
and encoded groups of features collectively rather than in-
dividually. In contrast, we employ a different strategy by
incorporating rotary positional embedding (RoPE, Su et al.,
2023) into TFrow to break the symmetry between identically
distributed features. RoPE is widely adopted in recent LLMs
(Dubey et al., 2024) and directly encodes relative positional
information into the attention mechanism by rotating the
query and key vectors. The rotation angle is determined
by the position p in the sequence and the dimension index
i, defined as θi = p/(base2i/d), where d is the embedding
dimension and base is the frequency scaling factor. More
1 2 3 4 5
Feature 0
1 2 3 4 5
Feature 1
1 2 3 4 5
Feature 2
1 2 3 4 5
Feature 3
X
 RoPE
 No RoPE
Figure 4. An example of learning collapse without RoPE for the
balance scale dataset. (Upper) The histograms show that
the four features follow the same discrete distribution. ( Lower)
The t-SNE visualization of the input features and learned row-
wise embeddings H with and without RoPE demonstrates that
RoPE can effectively alleviate representation collapse. The colors
represent 3 classes.
details can be found in Appendix D.
While the use of RoPE breaks permutation invariance with
respect to column order, it can effectively mitigate the rep-
resentation collapse. For instance, on the balance scale
dataset, RoPE preserves distinct representations across dif-
ferent samples (Figure 4 middle). Following Xiong et al.
(2023), we use a large scaling factor of 100,000 for RoPE to
enhance generalization to a greater number of features than
seen during training (up to 100). To approximately restore
permutation invariance, TabICL adopts the same strategy as
other TabPFN-like models by ensembling predictions over
multiple column permutations.
3.4. Dataset-wise In-Context Learning
After converting all samples into embeddings H ∈ Rn×4d,
training labels are mapped to the same space as H using
one-hot encoding. The embeddings of X and y for the
training set are added to create the final training embeddings
Htrain. We then process Htrain and Htest using a 12-layer
Transformer with 4 attention heads, denoted by TFicl. The
5

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
embeddings in Htrain can attend to one another while those
in Htest can only attend to Htrain. Finally, a two-layer MLP
converts the outputs of Htest into class probabilities for the
test samples.
3.5. Computational Complexity Analysis
To characterize the computational efficiency and scalability
of TabICL, we analyze the time complexity of its three
components for a table with n rows and m features:
1. TF col processes each column independently using
ISAB, resulting in complexity O(nkm), where k is
the fixed number of inducing vectors.
2. TF row applies self-attention over features and 4 [CLS]
tokens per row, yielding complexity O(m2n). TFrow
is efficient since m ≪ n in most tabular settings.
3. TF icl operates on the compressed row embeddings via
self-attention with complexity O(n2). While quadratic
in n, its cost is incurred once since the feature dimen-
sion is collapsed, ensuring practical efficiency.
The overall complexity of TabICL is O(m2n + n2). In
contrast, TabPFNv2 alternates column-wise and row-wise
attentions without collapsing dimensions, resulting in com-
plexity O(m2n+n2m). As a result, TabPFNv2 can become
computationally expensive for large n and moderate m.
4. Pretraining and Inference
4.1. Improved Pretraining Synthetic Datasets
TabICL is pre-trained exclusively on synthetic datasets. To
ensure realistic dependencies among variables, we gener-
ate these datasets using structural causal models (SCMs),
following the approach proposed in TabPFN (v1). We first
sample a directed acyclic graph (DAG) to define depen-
dencies, following the structure of a fully connected MLP,
where each neuron corresponds to a variable. Each feature
c is then modeled as a function f of its parent variables
Pa(c) in the graph, with added independent noise ϵ, i.e.,
c = f (Pa(c)) + ϵ. Compared to previous work, we enrich
the dataset generation in two ways: (i) we introduce tree-
based SCMs to benefit from their inductive biases, and (ii)
increase the diversity of modeling functions f.
Tree-based generation Inspired by Grinsztajn (2024), we
introduce tree-based SCMs to leverage their ability to model
complex interactions and hierarchical dependencies between
variables. We define f using an XGBoost regression model,
as it is widely favored by practitioners and supports multi-
output regression. At each layer of the graph, an XGBoost
model is trained on fake targets drawn from Gaussian noise,
taking the values of the parent variables as input. The ob-
tained predictions then become the values of the child vari-
ables. To balance data generation, we combine SCMs (70%)
with tree-based SCMs (30%). Appendix C gives details and
examples of generated data.
Diversifying activation functions In TabPFN (v1),
f is defined as a random affine mapping (a lin-
ear layer) with an activation function chosen from
[Identity, Tanh, Leaky ReLU, ELU]. We enrich this set
with 15 additional activation functions to enhance the diver-
sity of non-linear dependencies, introducing for example
non-monotone or discontinuous functions. We also include
random activation functions sampled from Gaussian pro-
cesses with random kernels. Gaussian Process functions
have been used for synthetic data generation for time series
foundation models (Ansari et al., 2024), but not as activa-
tion functions and with different types of kernels. Finally,
we added an option to use different activation functions
across layers and applied standardization followed by ran-
dom rescaling before each activation function. Figure C.1
visualizes the employed activation functions.
4.2. Curriculum Learning for Large-scale Pretraining
Similar to pretraining LLMs on shorter sentences before
moving to longer ones, we gradually increase the size of
synthetic datasets (i.e., the number of samples) while adjust-
ing the micro batch size NB used for gradient accumulation
to accommodate memory constraints. We employed a three-
stage procedure:
1. NB = 4 with a fixed size of 1,024 for 160K steps;
2. NB = 1 with the size randomly drawn from a log-
uniform distribution between 1K and 40K over 2K
steps. Activation checkpointing is enabled for datasets
exceeding 10K samples, and we accordingly reduce
the number of features to avoid out-of-memory issues;
3. NB = 1 with the size uniformly sampled between 40K
and 60K for 50 steps, training onlyTFicl while freezing
all other components.
Each step consists of 512 datasets with the number of
features ( ≤ 100) and classes ( ≤ 10) randomly sampled.
FlashAttention and automatic mixed precision are applied
globally. The pretraining took 20 days on three A100 GPUs
with 40GB memory using PyTorch (16, 3, and 1 days for
stage 1, 2, and 3, respectively). Appendix E.1 gives more
pretraining details.
4.3. Hierarchical Class-extension Strategy
We tackle many-class classification problems (> 10 classes)
through hierarchical classification (Silla & Freitas, 2011).
Specifically, we recursively and evenly partition classes into
subgroups of up to 10 classes, forming a multi-level classifi-
cation tree. A classification problem with k classes requires
6

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
a hierarchy with depth r = ⌈log10 k⌉. Each internal node
in the tree predicts the probability of its child groups, and
each leaf predicts the probability of the classes it contains.
During inference, the final probability for a given class is
obtained by multiplying the probabilities across all nodes
situated on the unique root-to-leaf path leading to this class.
See Appendix E.3 for more details.
As noted earlier, labels are used exclusively in the final ICL
block. Consequently, the hierarchical tree is constructed
during dataset-wise ICL, with all sub-tasks sharing the same
learned row embeddings H and the same TFicl for ICL pre-
dictions. This kind of sharing greatly enhances the efficiency
of TabICL in hierarchical classification scenarios.
4.4. Memory-efficient Inference
Using FlashAttention, which offers linear memory complex-
ity with respect to sequence length, we observed that the
peak activation memory can be effectively modeled by a
polynomial regression during inference: α1 × batch size +
α2 ×seq len+α3 ×batch size×seq len+α4. This enabled
us to dynamically adjust the batch size based on sequence
length and available GPU memory. The batch dimension
serves different roles depending on the context: it repre-
sents the number of columns for column-wise embedding,
the sample size for row-wise interaction, and the number
of datasets for dataset-wise ICL. Inspired by Rajbhandari
et al. (2021), intermediate activations can be offloaded to
CPU and disk as needed to further reduce memory consump-
tion. These optimizations enable TabICL to handle datasets
with 100K samples and 500 features using only 5 GB of
GPU memory and 32 GB of RAM. This suffices for many
real-world applications. See Appendix E.2 for details.
5. Experiments
5.1. Benchmark
We evaluate TabICL on the TALENT benchmark introduced
by Ye et al. (2025). It comprises 200 classification datasets
(120 binary and 80 multiclass datasets) and comes with re-
sults for over 30 baseline methods. To ensure a fair compari-
son, we exclude 15 datasets that were used by TabPFNv2 for
hyperparameter tuning and model selection (see Appendix F
for more details). In what follows, we mainly focus on the
171 datasets with at most 10 classes, since these can be
handled natively by TabICL and TabPFNv2.
Datasets are split into 64% training, 16% validation, and
20% test data. While most models rely on the validation set
for early stopping and hyperparameter tuning, TabICL and
TabPFNv2 do not. Nonetheless, we opted to train TabICL
and TabPFNv2 using the training data only, which places
them at a disadvantage. On the flip side, both TabICL and
TabPFNv2 leverage ensembles, unlike the other deep learn-
ing models. In Appendix H, we show that increasing en-
semble size improves performance for both TabPFNv2 and
TabICL, with TabPFNv2 benefiting more from ensembling.
A fair comparison would require training the other models
as an ensemble as well. However, this is computationally
expensive, was not part of the original benchmark, and is
not implemented in these experiments.
Both TabICL and TabPFNv2 average over 32 predictions ob-
tained by randomly shuffling columns and classes and using
different pre-processors. TabICL applies z-normalization
with or without power transformation to all input features.
See Hollmann et al. (2025) for details on TabPFNv2. To
avoid out-of-memory issues, we subsample training sets to
30K samples for TabPFNv2, while TabICL could predict on
all datasets without subsampling. In addition, we disable au-
tomatic mixed precision across all methods during inference
to ensure reproducibility and consistent time measurements.
5.2. Results
TabICL obtains state-of-the-art accuracy. Figure 5
shows accuracies relative to the tuned MLP for all models.
TabICL obtains the best median relative accuracy across all
datasets while being much faster than traditional state-of-
the-art models: the geometric mean training+inference time
per 1K samples for TabICL is 1.1 seconds, while tuning
CatBoost on a CPU takes around 3 minutes, and RealMLP
and ModernNCA on a GPU take around 7 minutes. Looking
at the ranks of each method based on the obtained accura-
cies, the critical difference diagram in Figure I.1 shows that
TabICL and TabPFNv2 outperform competitors by a wide
margin, while the difference between the two of them is not
statistically significant.
Speedup over TabPFNv2. Figure 6 shows that TabICL
is 1.5× faster than TabPFNv2 on small datasets and 3-10×
faster on large datasets. This is facilitated by the hybrid ar-
chitecture of TabICL, using fewer of the expensive row-wise
and column-wise attention layers with smaller embedding
dimension before ICL on tokenized rows. On a dataset with
10,000 samples and 100 features, TabICL takes roughly 20
seconds versus 1 minute 40 seconds for TabPFNv2, while
for a dataset of 1000 samples and 10 features, TabICL takes
1 second compared to 2 seconds for TabPFNv2. The empir-
ical speedup of TabICL over TabPFNv2 also corroborates
the complexity analysis in Section 3.5. In Figure B.1, we
fit simple scaling laws to predict the runtime of TabICL and
TabPFNv2 based on the number of samples and features.
These scaling laws show that the average speedup of TabICL
remains around five-fold for large datasets.
TabICL enables ICL for large datasets. While
TabPFNv2 achieves excellent performance on datasets up to
10K samples, it has only been pre-trained with up to 2048
7

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
-10% -5% 0% 5% 10%
Relative accuracy improvement over MLP (↑)
TabICL
TabPFNv2
ModernNCA
RealMLP
LoCalPFN
CatBoost
TabR
TabM
LightGBM
XGBoost
FT-T
ResNet
TabPFN
MLP-PLR
TuneTables
DCNv2
AutoInt
RForest
ExcelF
SNN
TANGOS
TabCaps
PTaRL
DANets
NODE
TabT
LogReg
GrowNet
KNN
SwitchT
TabNet
101 102 103
Geom. mean train time [s] per 1K samples
Figure 5. Accuracy and training/inference times on the TAL-
ENT benchmark up to 10 classes. The red bar indicates the me-
dian relative accuracy improvements over MLP across all datasets
for each method. For TabICL and TabPFNv2, the time reported
corresponds to training+inference on an A100 GPU. For the other
models, it includes both training and hyperparameter tuning. Since
Ye et al. (2025) track only the training time using the best hyper-
parameters found after 100 tuning steps, we approximate the total
training time by multiplying this value by 100. For TabPFN (v1),
LoCalPFN, and TuneTables, we do not report the time since the
original time measurement does not include the inference time.
training samples and can fail on datasets above 30K sam-
ples due to its memory usage. Figure 7 shows that unlike
TabPFNv2, the performance of TabICL remains strong for
larger datasets. While ICL is often used in few-shot settings,
this demonstrates that foundation models can compete with
the best deep learning or tree-based models, even in large-
sample regimes where the latter have the most potential.
Additional results in Appendix B demonstrate that TabICL
also performs well for many classes, features, and high ra-
tios of categorical features. To enhance the performance of
TabPFNv2 on large datasets, Hollmann et al. (2025) pro-
posed a random forest extension: during training, the data
is partitioned using decision trees, and TabPFNv2 is fit-
ted at each leaf to enable localized predictions at inference
time. We found that this extension can significantly improve
the performance of both TabPFNv2 and TabICL on large
datasets (refer to Appendix G for more details).
104 105 106
Number of cells
1×
2×
5×
10×
Speedup
Figure 6. Speedup of TabICL vs. TabPFNv2 on datasets with
less than 30K samples and at most 10 classes.
103 104 105
n samples
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Rank
ModernNCA
CatBoost
TabPFNv2
TabICL
Figure 7. Model rankings as a function of sample size. Each
point is the rank of one method on one dataset. Lower rank is better.
The lines show the bootstrap median and 10% / 90% bootstrap
confidence intervals of a piecewise linear fit.
TabICL produces reliable probabilities. In many prac-
tical situations, the quality of the estimated probabilities
is crucial for decision-making. Therefore, we also report
the log loss (a.k.a. cross-entropy loss), which is a proper
scoring rule and therefore rewards accurate prediction of
probabilities (Gneiting & Raftery, 2007). Since TabICL
does not leverage hyperparameter tuning, its predictions are
not specifically optimized towards accuracy. The critical
difference diagrams in Appendix I show that TabICL and
TabPFNv2 significantly outperform accuracy-tuned com-
petitors on the log loss, though the difference between the
two is not significant, indicating that both produce more
reliable probability estimates than the other models.
TabICL remains effective with more than 10 classes.
On datasets with more than 10 classes, we apply the hier-
archical classification strategy from Section 4.3 to TabICL.
Thanks to its use of label-independent row embeddings that
can be shared between all sub-classifiers, TabICL scales
efficiently to a large number of classes. Figure 8 shows that
TabICL still achieves the second best result on these datasets
in terms of mean normalized accuracy, while TabPFNv2
cannot natively handle more than 10 classes.
8

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
Normalized Accuracy
RealMLP
TabICL
TabR
ResNet
ModernNCA
MLP-PLR
FT-T
MLP
XGBoost
CatBoost
Figure 8. Normalized accuracy across the 12 datasets with more
than 10 classes. Colors identify tree-based models (green), deep
learning models (pink), retrieval models (gray), transformers (or-
ange), and in-context models (blue).
Accuracy
-2%
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%
Rel. Improvements over No Tree
AUC
-1%
0%
1%
2%
Log Loss
-4%
-2%
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
Figure 9. Relative improvements of TabICL pretrained on
prior datasets with versus without tree-based SCMs across
200 datasets. Green triangles denote the mean relative improve-
ments. To mitigate computational overhead, we pretrained TabICL
for 20K steps following the stage 1 setup of curriculum learning.
5.3. Ablation Studies
Tree-based SCMs prove beneficial. Incorporating the
inductive biases of tree-based models during pretraining
improve the performance of TabICL, as shown in Figure 9.
Curriculum learning effectively improves the perfor-
mance of TabICL on large datasets. Across the three
stages of curriculum learning, the average rank of TabICL
improves from 11.4 (ninth place), to 7.46 (second), and fi-
nally to 6.95 (first), as shown in Figure E.2. These results
show the effectiveness of curriculum learning. However,
we also observe a slight performance drop on some small
datasets during curriculum learning, as shown in Figure 10.
6. Conclusion
We introduce TabICL, a novel tabular foundation model
that extends the scalability of existing tabular foundation
models by an order of magnitude. Evaluated on datasets
with up to 100K training samples, it delivers excellent per-
formance without hyperparameter tuning, making it nearly
Stage 1
-2%
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
Rel. Improvements over Stage 1
Stage 2
 Stage 3
103
104
105
# of samples
Figure 10. Relative accuracy improvements over Stage 1 across
200 classification datasets. Green triangles denote the mean
relative improvements.
two orders of magnitude faster than other tabular methods
requiring hyper-parameter tuning. TabICL achieves this
through a hybrid architecture and memory-saving optimiza-
tions. Compared to the newly released and leading tabular
foundation model TabPFNv2, TabICL achieves comparable
performance while being more scalable and faster.
Limitations (1) Like other foundation models, TabICL
suffers from slow inference speed, though TabPFNv2 has
shown caching can alleviate this. Currently, TabICL is lim-
ited to classification, but regression can be treated with
similar methodology, as Hollmann et al. (2025) showed. (2)
A defining characteristic of tabular data is that columns do
not have a natural ordering. Ideally, tabular methods should
be invariant to column permutations. However, TabICL
violates this invariance due to the use of RoPE. (3) Our
evaluation inherits the strengths and weaknesses of the TAL-
ENT benchmark. Notably, TALENT trains single models
tuned using the holdout method, while ensembling models
evaluated using cross-validation can improve performance.
Bagging increases computational cost, whereas TabICL can
simply be trained on the full data without needing a val-
idation set. (4) TALENT employs mean imputation for
handling missing values. However, it might be better to
allow TabPFNv2 to handle missing values internally despite
the low proportion of missing values in TALENT. (5) We did
not provide categorical information to TabPFNv2. Though
TabPFNv2 infers categorical features internally, providing
this information explicitly could enhance its performance.
Outlook In-context learning for tabular data was origi-
nally introduced as a speedup for small tables (Hollmann
et al., 2022). As the expressive power of a forward pass in
a transformer may seem limited, one might wonder if in-
context learning loses its edge given sufficient data. We find
that even with large data, pre-training induces implicit priors
that give in-context transformers a competitive advantage.
9

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
Acknowledgements
We thank Lennart Purucker and Samuel M¨uller for interest-
ing discussions. We are also grateful to Si-Yang Liu and
Han-Jia Ye, the authors of the TALENT benchmark, for
providing information and clarifying our questions. Finally,
we thank the anonymous ICML reviewers for their valuable
feedback and suggestions.
Impact Statement
This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field
of Machine Learning. There are many potential societal
consequences of our work, none which we feel must be
specifically highlighted here.
References
Ansari, A. F., Stella, L., Turkmen, C., Zhang, X., Mercado,
P., Shen, H., Shchur, O., Rangapuram, S. S., Arango, S. P.,
Kapoor, S., et al. Chronos: Learning the language of time
series. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07815, 2024.
Barbero, F., Vitvitskyi, A., Perivolaropoulos, C., Pascanu,
R., and Veliˇckovi´c, P. Round and Round We Go! What
makes Rotary Positional Encodings useful?, October
2024.
Bordt, S., Nori, H., and Caruana, R. Elephants never forget:
Testing language models for memorization of tabular data.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.06644, 2024.
Brown, T. B., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan,
J., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G.,
Askell, A., Agarwal, S., Herbert-V oss, A., Krueger, G.,
Henighan, T., Child, R., Ramesh, A., Ziegler, D. M., Wu,
J., Winter, C., Hesse, C., Chen, M., Sigler, E., Litwin, M.,
Gray, S., Chess, B., Clark, J., Berner, C., McCandlish,
S., Radford, A., Sutskever, I., and Amodei, D. Language
Models are Few-Shot Learners, July 2020.
Cartella, F., Anunciacao, O., Funabiki, Y ., Yamaguchi, D.,
Akishita, T., and Elshocht, O. Adversarial Attacks for
Tabular Data: Application to Fraud Detection and Imbal-
anced Data, January 2021.
Chen, T. and Guestrin, C. XGBoost: A Scalable Tree
Boosting System. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining, pp. 785–794, August 2016. doi:
10.1145/2939672.2939785.
Da Costa, N., Pf ¨ortner, M., Da Costa, L., and Hennig, P.
Sample path regularity of gaussian processes from the co-
variance kernel. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14886, 2023.
den Breejen, F., Bae, S., Cha, S., and Yun, S.-Y . Why
In-Context Learning Transformers are Tabular Data Clas-
sifiers, May 2024.
Dorogush, A. V ., Ershov, V ., and Gulin, A. CatBoost: Gra-
dient boosting with categorical features support, October
2018.
Dubey, A., Jauhri, A., Pandey, A., Kadian, A., Al-Dahle,
A., Letman, A., Mathur, A., Schelten, A., Yang, A., Fan,
A., et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Fang, X., Xu, W., Tan, F. A., Zhang, J., Hu, Z., Qi, Y ., Nick-
leach, S., Socolinsky, D., Sengamedu, S., and Faloutsos,
C. Large language models(llms) on tabular data: Predic-
tion, generation, and understanding – a survey, 2024.
Feuer, B., Schirrmeister, R. T., Cherepanova, V ., Hegde,
C., Hutter, F., Goldblum, M., Cohen, N., and White, C.
TuneTables: Context Optimization for Scalable Prior-
Data Fitted Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11137,
2024.
Gardner, J., Perdomo, J. C., and Schmidt, L. Large Scale
Transfer Learning for Tabular Data via Language Model-
ing, June 2024.
Garg, S., Tsipras, D., Liang, P., and Valiant, G. What Can
Transformers Learn In-Context? A Case Study of Simple
Function Classes, August 2023.
Gneiting, T. and Raftery, A. E. Strictly proper scoring
rules, prediction, and estimation. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 102(477):359–378, 2007.
Gorishniy, Y ., Rubachev, I., and Babenko, A. On embed-
dings for numerical features in tabular deep learning. Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:
24991–25004, 2022.
Gorishniy, Y ., Kotelnikov, A., and Babenko, A. TabM: Ad-
vancing Tabular Deep Learning with Parameter-Efficient
Ensembling, November 2024.
Grinsztajn, L. R´econcilier l’apprentissage profond avec les
donn´ees tabulaires. PhD thesis, Universit´e Paris-Saclay,
2024.
Grinsztajn, L., Oyallon, E., and Varoquaux, G. Why do tree-
based models still outperform deep learning on tabular
data?, July 2022.
Hegselmann, S., Buendia, A., Lang, H., Agrawal, M., Jiang,
X., and Sontag, D. Tabllm: Few-shot classification of
tabular data with large language models. In International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pp.
5549–5581. PMLR, 2023.
10

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
Hendrycks, D. and Gimpel, K. Gaussian error linear units
(gelus). arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.08415, 2016.
Hollmann, N., M ¨uller, S., Eggensperger, K., and Hut-
ter, F. Tabpfn: A transformer that solves small tabu-
lar classification problems in a second. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2207.01848, 2022.
Hollmann, N., M¨uller, S., Purucker, L., Krishnakumar, A.,
K¨orfer, M., Hoo, S. B., Schirrmeister, R. T., and Hutter,
F. Accurate predictions on small data with a tabular foun-
dation model. Nature, 637(8045):319–326, January 2025.
ISSN 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-08328-6.
Johnson, A. E. W., Pollard, T. J., Shen, L., Lehman, L.-
w. H., Feng, M., Ghassemi, M., Moody, B., Szolovits, P.,
Anthony Celi, L., and Mark, R. G. MIMIC-III, a freely
accessible critical care database. Scientific Data, 3(1):
160035, May 2016. ISSN 2052-4463. doi: 10.1038/sdata.
2016.35.
Kim, M. J., Grinsztajn, L., and Varoquaux, G. CARTE:
Pretraining and Transfer for Tabular Learning, May 2024.
Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Klambauer, G., Unterthiner, T., Mayr, A., and Hochreiter,
S. Self-normalizing neural networks. Neural Information
Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Koshil, M., Nagler, T., Feurer, M., and Eggensperger, K.
Towards Localization via Data Embedding for TabPFN.
2024.
Kossen, J., Band, N., Lyle, C., Gomez, A. N., Rainforth,
T., and Gal, Y . Self-attention between datapoints: Going
beyond individual input-output pairs in deep learning.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
28742–28756, 2021.
Krizhevsky, A. Convolutional deep belief networks on cifar-
10.
Lee, J., Lee, Y ., Kim, J., Kosiorek, A. R., Choi, S., and Teh,
Y . W. Set Transformer: A Framework for Attention-based
Permutation-Invariant Neural Networks, May 2019.
Ma, J., Thomas, V ., Hosseinzadeh, R., Kamkari, H., Labach,
A., Cresswell, J. C., Golestan, K., Yu, G., V olkovs, M.,
and Caterini, A. L. TabDPT: Scaling Tabular Foundation
Models, October 2024a.
Ma, J., Thomas, V ., Yu, G., and Caterini, A. In-
Context Data Distillation with TabPFN. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.06971, 2024b.
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., and Dean, J. Efficient
Estimation of Word Representations in Vector Space,
September 2013.
M¨uller, A., Curino, C., and Ramakrishnan, R. MotherNet:
A Foundational Hypernetwork for Tabular Classification,
December 2023.
M¨uller, S., Hollmann, N., Arango, S. P., Grabocka, J., and
Hutter, F. Transformers Can Do Bayesian Inference,
August 2024.
Rahimi, A. and Recht, B. Random features for large-scale
kernel machines. Neural Information Processing Systems,
20, 2007.
Rajbhandari, S., Ruwase, O., Rasley, J., Smith, S., and He,
Y . ZeRO-Infinity: Breaking the GPU Memory Wall for
Extreme Scale Deep Learning, April 2021.
Rubachev, I., Kartashev, N., Gorishniy, Y ., and Babenko,
A. Tabred: Analyzing pitfalls and filling the gaps
in tabular deep learning benchmarks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.19380, 2024.
Siegler, R. Balance Scale. UCI Machine Learning Reposi-
tory, 1976. DOI: https://doi.org/10.24432/C5488X.
Silla, C. N. and Freitas, A. A. A survey of hierarchi-
cal classification across different application domains.
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , 22(1):31–72,
January 2011. ISSN 1573-756X. doi: 10.1007/
s10618-010-0175-9.
Su, J., Lu, Y ., Pan, S., Murtadha, A., Wen, B., and Liu, Y .
RoFormer: Enhanced Transformer with Rotary Position
Embedding, November 2023.
Thawani, A., Pujara, J., Szekely, P. A., and Ilievski, F. Repre-
senting Numbers in NLP: A Survey and a Vision, March
2021.
Thomas, V ., Ma, J., Hosseinzadeh, R., Golestan, K., Yu, G.,
V olkovs, M., and Caterini, A. Retrieval & Fine-Tuning
for In-Context Tabular Models, June 2024.
van Breugel, B. and van der Schaar, M. Why Tabular Foun-
dation Models Should Be a Research Priority, June 2024.
von Oswald, J., Niklasson, E., Randazzo, E., Sacramento,
J., Mordvintsev, A., Zhmoginov, A., and Vladymyrov, M.
Transformers learn in-context by gradient descent, May
2023.
Xie, S. M., Raghunathan, A., Liang, P., and Ma, T. An
Explanation of In-context Learning as Implicit Bayesian
Inference, July 2022.
11

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
Xiong, W., Liu, J., Molybog, I., Zhang, H., Bhargava, P.,
Hou, R., Martin, L., Rungta, R., Sankararaman, K. A.,
Oguz, B., Khabsa, M., Fang, H., Mehdad, Y ., Narang, S.,
Malik, K., Fan, A., Bhosale, S., Edunov, S., Lewis, M.,
Wang, S., and Ma, H. Effective Long-Context Scaling of
Foundation Models, November 2023.
Xu, D., Cirit, O., Asadi, R., Sun, Y ., and Wang, W. Mixture
of In-Context Prompters for Tabular PFNs, May 2024.
Ye, H.-J., Yin, H.-H., and Zhan, D.-C. Modern Neighbor-
hood Components Analysis: A Deep Tabular Baseline
Two Decades Later, July 2024.
Ye, H.-J., Liu, S.-Y ., Cai, H.-R., Zhou, Q.-L., and Zhan, D.-
C. A Closer Look at Deep Learning Methods on Tabular
Datasets, January 2025.
Zeng, Y ., Kang, W., and Mueller, A. C. Tabflex: Scaling tab-
ular learning to millions with linear attention. In NeurIPS
2024 Third Table Representation Learning Workshop ,
2024.
Zhou, C., Li, Q., Li, C., Yu, J., Liu, Y ., Wang, G., Zhang,
K., Ji, C., Yan, Q., He, L., Peng, H., Li, J., Wu, J., Liu,
Z., Xie, P., Xiong, C., Pei, J., Yu, P. S., and Sun, L. A
comprehensive survey on pretrained foundation models:
A history from BERT to ChatGPT. International Journal
of Machine Learning and Cybernetics, November 2024.
ISSN 1868-808X. doi: 10.1007/s13042-024-02443-6.
Zhu, B., Shi, X., Erickson, N., Li, M., Karypis, G., and
Shoaran, M. XTab: Cross-table Pretraining for Tabular
Transformers, May 2023.
12

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
A. Systematic Comparison between TabICL and TabPFNv2
This appendix provides a systematic comparison between TabICL and TabPFNv2, two tabular foundation models that
leverage In-Context Learning (ICL) to make predictions. Both models are pretrained on synthetic datasets and aim to deliver
strong performance on unseen real-world tabular datasets.
A.1. Architecture
Core mechanism. (1) TabICL employs a two-stage architecture, where the first stage uses a column-then-row attention
mechanism to build fixed-dimensional embeddings and effectively collapses the column dimension to reduce computational
complexity for the subsequent ICL stage. (2) TabPFNv2 utilizes a two-way attention mechanism that alternates between
column-wise and row-wise attentions. These attentions operate on the input table across original dimensions without any
intermediate collapse.
Representation collapse. When features have similar distributions, both TabICL and TabPFNv2 may suffer from the
representation collapse issue. (1) To alleviate this problem, TabICL incorporates Rotary Positional Embedding (RoPE) into
the transformer used in row-wise interaction. RoPE helps break the symmetry between identically distributed features by
encoding relative positional information. (2) TabPFNv2 addresses this by introducing random feature identifier vectors for
each feature. It also encodes groups of features collectively rather than individually.
Label fusion. TabICL and TabPFNv2 differ significantly in when they incorporate label information. (1) TabICL employs
a late fusion strategy. TabICL processes input features independently of their labels during row-wise embedding and
column-wise interaction. Labels are utilized exclusively in the final ICL stage. (2) TabPFNv2 employs an early fusion
strategy for label information. TabPFNv2 directly concatenates the input features with the labels of the training samples,
processing them together from the very beginning and throughout its layers.
A.2. Pretraining
Prior generation. Both TabICL and TabPFNv2 are pretrained exclusively on synthetic prior datasets. (1) TabICL builds
on the previous prior generation of TabPFN (v1), which relies on Structural Causal Models (SCMs). TabICL introduces two
more extensions: broader nonlinear modeling capabilities of SCMs and the integration of tree-based SCMs to incorporate
the inductive biases of tree-based models. (2) TabPFNv2 constructs diverse Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) through a
sophisticated procedure (i.e., growing networks with redirection sampling method) and incorporates various computational
mappings at graph edges, including small neural networks, categorical feature discretization, and decision trees. However,
the code for its prior generation is not open-source.
Dataset size. (1) TabICL was pretrained using curriculum learning that progressively scales the number of samples from
1,024 to 60K. The number of features was sampled uniformly up to 100, and the number of classes was sampled uniformly
up to 10. (2) TabPFNv2 was pretrained on synthetic datasets containing up to 2,048 training samples (uniformly sampled).
The number of features was drawn from a beta distribution and then linearly scaled to the range from 1 to 160, while the
number of classes was also uniformly sampled up to 10.
Pretraining scale. (1) TabICL was pretrained over approximately 82 million synthetic datasets. (2) TabPFNv2 was trained
on a larger corpus, comprising approximately 130 million synthetic datasets.
A.3. Scalability and Efficiency
Dataset size handling. (1) At inference, TabICL is capable of handling tables with 100K samples and 500 features within
5GB of GPU memory, and can deal with any number of classes using hierarchical class-extension strategy. (2) TabPFNv2
excels on tables with up to 10K samples and 500 features, and can only deal with up to 10 classes.
Computational complexity. Given a table with n rows and m columns, the time complexity of TabICL is O(m2n + n2),
while the time complexity of TabPFNv2 is O(m2n + n2m). Our extensive experiments demonstrate that TabICL is
systematically faster than TabPFNv2.
13

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
B. Further Experiments
Predicting the runtime of TabICL and TabPFNv2. To obtain rough predictions of the time for a forward pass (training
and inference) in TabICL and TabPFNv2, we leverage the runtime complexity of the column- and row-wise attention
modules. As discussed in Section 3.5, for a table with n rows and m columns, the runtime complexity is O(n2m + nm2) =
O(nm(n + m)) for TabPFNv2, while it is O(n2 + nm2) for TabICL. For simplicity, we use the term nm(n + m) from the
complexity of TabPFNv2, plot this quantity on the x-axis of Figure B.1, and fit models of the form
time = α + β(nm(n + m))γ
with MSLE loss, that is, a MSE loss between the log-transformed time and the log-transformed prediction. To facilitate
a simpler comparison, we fix γ := 0 .8 for both models since it yields a good fit. We suspect that γ = 1 should be used
asymptotically for TabPFNv2, but then more additional terms would be needed to obtain a good fit. In this model, the
speedup of TabICL over TabPFNv2 for large datasets approaches5, while it is 1.4 for small datasets.
107 108 109 1010 1011
#cells · (#rows + #columns)
101
102
103
Fit+predict time [s]
1.5x
5.0x
TabPFNv2: y = 2 .65 + 10 −7 · 10.76x0.8
TabICL: y = 1 .87 + 10 −7 · 2.12x0.8
Figure B.1. Training+inference times of TabICL and TabPFNv2.Each point represents the time on one dataset on an A100 GPU. We
only use datasets with less than 30,000 samples because TabPFNv2 is applied with subsampling on larger datasets to avoid RAM overflow.
Metafeatures. We analyze the dependence of the ranks of TabICL, TabPFNv2, CatBoost, and ModernNCA based on
different dataset metafeatures. To this end, we fit piecewise linear regression models with pre-defined nodes to predict the
ranks of these models depending on a single metafeature.
Figure B.2 shows the scaling with the number of classes. The performance of TabICL deteriorates on datasets with three
classes but not on datasets with more classes. It is unclear if this is really due to the number of classes or caused by a
different characteristic present in the three-class datasets on the benchmark.
Figure B.3 shows the scaling with the number of features. These plots show that TabICL behaves well for large numbers of
features even though it tokenizes entire rows in the middle of the network before seeing any labels.
Figure B.4 shows the dependence on the ratio of categorical to numerical variables. In general, the performance of TabICL
and TabPFNv2 deteriorates somewhat in the presence of many categorical variables. However, it is notable that TabICL
performs slightly better than TabPFNv2 on such datasets even though TabPFNv2 has a more sophisticated categorical feature
generation in its prior.
C. Synthetic Datasets for Pretraining
C.1. SCM prior with more activation functions
In the TabPFN prior, we replace the activation layers by the following sequence of layers:
• A standardization layer that standardizes each feature across the batch (samples) dimension
• A random rescaling layer that, for each neuron i, computes xi ← exp(2a)(xi + b), with a, b ∼ N (0, 1) sampled once
per layer.
14

=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
n classes
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Rank
ModernNCA
CatBoost
TabPFNv2
TabICL
Figure B.2. Dependency of the benchmark rank on the number of classes. Each point is the rank of one method on one dataset. Lower
rank is better. The lines show the bootstrap median and 10% / 90% bootstrap confidence intervals of a piecewise linear fit.
101 102
n features
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Rank
ModernNCA
CatBoost
TabPFNv2
TabICL
Figure B.3. Dependency of the benchmark rank on the number of features. Each point is the rank of one method on one dataset.
Lower rank is better. The lines show the bootstrap median and 10% / 90% bootstrap confidence intervals of a piecewise linear fit.
• A random activation function. With probability 1/2, each layer uses the same type of activation function, otherwise
each layer samples the type of activation function independently.
On top of the original activation functions {Identity, tanh, LeakyReLU, ELU}, we add the following activation functions:
• ReLU
• ReLU6 (Krizhevsky)
• SELU (Klambauer et al., 2017)
• SiLU (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016)
• Softplus
• Hardtanh(x) = max( −1, min(1, x))
• Signum function
• Sine
• RBF(x) = exp( −x2)
• Exponential function
15

=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
cat ratio
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Rank
ModernNCA
CatBoost
TabPFNv2
TabICL
Figure B.4. Dependency of the benchmark rank on the ratio of categorical to overall features. Each point is the rank of one method
on one dataset. Lower rank is better. The lines show the bootstrap median and 10% / 90% bootstrap confidence intervals of a piecewise
linear fit.
• f (x) =
p
|x|
• f (x) = 1 |x|≤1
• f (x) = x2
• f (x) = |x|
• A random function f (x) = ϕ(x)⊤z, where z ∼ N (0, 1) and the feature map ϕ is defined randomly as
ϕ(x) := w
∥w∥2
⊙ sin(ax + b) ∈ RN ,
N := 256,
bi ∼ U [0, 2π],
ai ∼ U [0, N],
wi := a− exp(u)
i ,
u ∼ U [0.7, 3.0] .
Here, all random parameters are drawn once per layer, and ⊙ is an element-wise product. This is motivated by the
fact that for fixed feature map ϕ, the random function f (x) = ϕ(x)⊤z is a Gaussian process with covariance kernel
k(x, x′) = ϕ(x)⊤ϕ(x′). The design of ϕ is inspired by random Fourier features (Rahimi & Recht, 2007). The randomly
drawn exponent − exp(u) leads to different decays of coefficients with increasing frequency, which produces different
levels of smoothness for the sampled function as shown in Figure C.1 (right) (Da Costa et al., 2023). This activation
function applies standardization directly before the random function, such that the random rescaling has no effect.
Here, the random function is sampled with a probability ten times higher than the other activation functions to account for
the fact that it can represent many different functions.
Figure C.1 visualizes the used activation functions. Figure C.2 shows datasets from the resulting prior.
C.2. Tree-based SCM prior
The tree-based SCM prior replaces the linear and activation layers in the SCM prior by XGBoost models fitted on random
data. More specifically, these models are generated as follows:
• Sample n estimators and max depth independently as min{4, 1 + Exponential( λ = 0 .5)} and min{4, 2 +
Exponential(λ = 0.5)}, respectively.
16

=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
□3 □2 □1 0 1 2 3
□1.00
□0.75
□0.50
□0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
□3 □2 □1 0 1 2 3
□1.00
□0.75
□0.50
□0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Figure C.1. Activation functions from the SCM prior. Left: Non-random activation functions from the SCM prior without standard-
ization and random rescaling. Activation functions are randomly flipped along the x- and/or y-axis to fully utilize the space in the plot.
Right: Random instantiations of the random activation function from the SCM prior, including the automatic standardization of the inputs.
Figure C.2. Randomly generated 2D datasets from the SCM prior. The color corresponds to the class label.
17

=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
Figure C.3. Randomly generated 2D datasets from the tree-based SCM prior. The color corresponds to the class label.
• For each layer with n input and m output neurons, fit an XGBoost multi-output regressor with the parameters above on
the layer inputs xi with standard normal targets yi ∈ Rm, then use the fitted model to predict on the given inputs.
Figure C.3 shows datasets from the tree SCM prior.
D. Rotary Positional Embedding
Rotary Positional Encoding (RoPE) is a technique used in Transformer models to represent positional information in the
input data. RoPE encodes positional information directly into the attention mechanism through a rotation matrix applied to
the query and key vectors in self-attention. Given a position p, a frequency ω, and a vector x (query or key vector):
xp = RoPE(x, p) = R(p)x
where R(p) is a rotation matrix applied to the vector x, encoding positional information using sinusoidal functions. The
rotation matrix R(p) is based on a sinusoidal function and applies rotations independently to 2-dimensional subspaces of x.
18

=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
For each 2D pair of vector components (x2i, x2i+1), the rotation is defined as:
R(p)
 x2i
x2i+1

:=
cos(θi) − sin(θi)
sin(θi) cos( θi)
 x2i
x2i+1

,
θi := p
1000002i/d
where d is the dimensionality of the embedding and ωi = 10000 2i/d determines the frequency for each dimension. The
above equation indicates that for each dimension pair (2i, 2i + 1), the vector is rotated by an angle proportional to the
position p and the frequency ωi. RoPE directly modifies the query Q and key K vectors in the self-attention mechanism:
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
 (R(pQ)Q) · (R(pK)K)T
√
d

V .
Because relative positional information is preserved in the inner product, the attention scores naturally encode the relative
distance between positions pQ and pK.
Barbero et al. (2024) provides an alternative perspective on RoPE that aligns well with its use in our work. At lower indices
i, the rotation angle changes more rapidly with increasing p, resulting in high-frequency oscillations that resemble random
noise and encode positional information. Conversely, at higher indices i, the rotation angle changes more slowly with
increasing p, producing stable values that carry semantic information. In our case, RoPE effectively introduces noise to each
feature as its identifier in a controlled, predictable, and generalizable manner.
RoPE is also claimed to exhibit long-term decay, where tokens become less correlated as their relative distance increases.
However, this claim is questioned by Barbero et al. (2024), as it relies on an unrealistic oversimplification that queries and
keys are equal.
E. Setup of TabICL
E.1. Pretraining details
As outlined in the main paper, we employ curriculum learning to progressively increase the size of synthetic datasets (i.e.,
the number of samples) during pretraining. This process unfolds in three stages by adjusting the micro-batch size used for
gradient accumulation:
1. NB = 4 with a fixed size of 1,024 the first 160K steps.
2. NB = 1 with the size randomly drawn from a log-uniform distribution between 1K and 40K over 2K steps. Activation
checkpointing is enabled for datasets exceeding 10K samples, and we accordingly reduce the number of features to
avoid out-of-memory issues.
3. NB = 1 with the size uniformly sampled between 40K and 60K for 50 steps, training only TFicl while all other
components remain frozen.
Each step comprises 512 datasets. In the first stage, all datasets contain an equal number of samples. In the second and
third stages, datasets in each micro-batch have the same number of samples, but the number of samples varies between
different micro-batches. We use Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) and clip the gradient norm to 1. The learning rate schedules
for pretraining are shown in Figure E.1, including:
• Cosine decay with restarts for stage 1
• Polynomial decay for stage 2 and the learning rate is given by(lrinit − lrend) (1 − step/T )2 + lrend, where lrinit = 2e-5,
lrend = 5e-6, and the number of steps T is 2,000.
• Constant learning rate for stage 3
In addition, Figure E.2 shows critical difference diagrams across the three stages of curriculum learning. We observe that
average rank of TabICL improves consistently from 11.4 (ninth place), to 7.46 (second), and finally to 6.95 (first). This
provides strong empirical evidence for the effectiveness of curriculum learning.
19

=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
0 50K 100K 160K
Step
0.0
0.5
1.0
Learning rate
×10 4
(a) Cosine decay with restarts for stage 1
0 500 1000 1500 2000
Step
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Learning rate
×10 5
 (b) Polynomial decay for stage 2
0 10 20 30 40 50
Step
2Learning rate
×10 6
 (c) Constant learning rate for stage 3
Figure E.1. Learning rate schedules for 3 pretraining stages.
E.2. Memory-efficient inference
By employing FlashAttention, we have observed that the inference peak GPU memory consumption of the three trans-
formers of TabICL for column-wise embedding TFcol, row-wise interaction TFrow, and dataset-wise ICL TFicl can be well
approximated through the following polynomial regression:
MEM = α1 × batch size + α2 × seq len + α3 × batch size × seq len + α4
It is important to note that the specific meanings of batch size and sequence length vary across different transformers, as
outlined in Table E.1.
Batch Size Sequence Length
TFcol Number of features Number of samples
TFrow Number of samples Number of features
TFicl Number of datasets Number of samples
Table E.1. Notions of batch size and sequence length for different transformers
Given an input X ∈ Rb×n×m, where b, n, and m represent the number of datasets, the number of samples, and the number
of features, respectively, X is first reshaped to R(b×m)×n and processed by TFcol to get E = R(b×m)×n×d. Subsequently,
E is reshaped to R(b×n)×m×d and passed to TFrow, which generates H ∈ Rb×n×4d. Finally, H is fed into TFicl to predict
the test set entirely through ICL. We can see that it is necessary to set appropriate batch sizes for different transformers
in order to efficiently utilize GPU resources and avoid out-of-memory errors. This is precisely where the aforementioned
polynomial regression comes into play.
To this end, we first systematically tracked peak GPU memory usage of different transformers by varying both batch size
and sequence length on a A100 GPU with 40GB memory, and then we fit the parameters of the above polynomial regression
to the tracked data, as shown below:
MEMcol = (0.0708 × batch size) + (7.29 × 10−6 × seq len) + (0.00391 × batch size × seq len) + 137.62
MEMrow = (−2.07 × 10−5 × batch size) + (2.27 × 10−4 × seq len) + (0.00537 × batch size × seq len) + 138.54
MEMicl = (−0.260 × batch size) + (4.77 × 10−7 × seq len) + (0.0195 × batch size × seq len) + 140.58
The estimated memory is measured in megabytes (MB).
In addition to adjusting the batch size, we also offload intermediate activations to the CPU or disk as needed to further
alleviate GPU memory constraints. Figure E.3 illustrates the CPU and GPU memory consumption for a large dataset
containing 100K samples and 500 features (80% training set and 20% test set). As shown, only 5GB of GPU memory and
25GB of CPU memory are utilized, making this a highly affordable computational setup.
20

=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
7.510.012.515.017.520.022.525.0
[6.94] TabPFNv2
[9.32] TabR
[9.72] ModernNCA
[9.76] RealMLP
[9.96] TabM
[10.16] CatBoost
[10.54] LoCalPFN
[11.08] LightGBM
[11.40] TabICL-Stage1
[11.94] XGBoost
[13.15] FT-T
[13.70] MLP-PLR
[14.45] DCNv2
[14.53] ResNet
[15.01] MLP
[15.51] AutoInt
TabNet [25.19]
SwitchT [24.95]
GrowNet [22.69]
KNN [20.78]
LogReg [20.63]
TabT [19.94]
NODE [19.09]
DANets [17.95]
PTaRL [17.11]
TANGOS [16.92]
TabCaps [16.64]
TabPFN [16.25]
ExcelF [16.16]
TuneTables [15.94]
RForest [15.80]
SNN [15.72]
(a) Critical difference diagram (based on accuracy) after the stage 1 of curriculum learning
7.510.012.515.017.520.022.525.0
[7.13] TabPFNv2
[7.46] TabICL-Stage2
[9.45] TabR
[9.85] ModernNCA
[9.87] RealMLP
[10.06] TabM
[10.30] CatBoost
[10.66] LoCalPFN
[11.20] LightGBM
[12.07] XGBoost
[13.31] FT-T
[13.87] MLP-PLR
[14.54] DCNv2
[14.63] ResNet
[15.11] MLP
[15.63] AutoInt
TabNet [25.28]
SwitchT [25.01]
GrowNet [22.77]
KNN [20.88]
LogReg [20.63]
TabT [19.98]
NODE [19.16]
DANets [18.07]
PTaRL [17.20]
TANGOS [17.07]
TabCaps [16.82]
ExcelF [16.34]
TabPFN [16.31]
TuneTables [15.99]
RForest [15.92]
SNN [15.84]
(b) Critical difference diagram (based on accuracy) after the stage 2 of curriculum learning
7.510.012.515.017.520.022.525.0
[6.95] TabICL-Stage3
[7.17] TabPFNv2
[9.46] TabR
[9.84] ModernNCA
[9.90] RealMLP
[10.11] TabM
[10.35] CatBoost
[10.67] LoCalPFN
[11.25] LightGBM
[12.09] XGBoost
[13.30] FT-T
[13.90] MLP-PLR
[14.55] DCNv2
[14.65] ResNet
[15.12] MLP
[15.64] AutoInt
TabNet [25.27]
SwitchT [24.99]
GrowNet [22.76]
KNN [20.86]
LogReg [20.63]
TabT [19.99]
NODE [19.16]
DANets [18.09]
PTaRL [17.22]
TANGOS [17.06]
TabCaps [16.83]
ExcelF [16.37]
TabPFN [16.31]
TuneTables [16.00]
RForest [15.92]
SNN [15.84]
(c) Critical difference diagram (based on accuracy) after the stage 3 of curriculum learning
Figure E.2. Critical difference diagrams for different stages of curriculum learning
21

=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
0 3 6 9 12 15 18
Time (s)
0
5
10
15
20
25
CPU Memory (GB)
0
1
2
3
4
5
GPU Memory (GB)
Dataset-wise ICL
Row-wise interaction
Column-wise embedding
(a) CPU and GPU Memory Usage without Automatic Mixed Precision
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Time (s)
0
5
10
15
20
25
CPU Memory (GB)
0
1
2
3
4
5
GPU Memory (GB)
Column-wise embedding
Row-wise interaction
Dataset-wise ICL
(b) CPU and GPU Memory Usage with Automatic Mixed Precision
Figure E.3. CPU and GPU memory consumption during inference for a dataset with 100K samples and 500 features. During
dataset-wise ICL, there is only a single batch (i.e., a single dataset), which corresponds to a sharp spike in GPU usage at the final stage of
computation.
Figure E.4 shows the CPU and GPU memory consumption for a larger dataset containing 500K samples and 500 features
(80% training set and 20% test set). As depicted, the computation requires less than 14GB of GPU memory. The CPU
memory usage reaches approximately 120GB, which, however, can be significantly reduced through optional disk offloading
via memory mapping.
We can observe that GPU memory consumption exhibits periodic fluctuations during the column-wise embedding and
row-wise interaction phases. This is because the entire dataset is automatically divided into multiple batches, with the batch
size determined dynamically based on the polynomial regression mentioned earlier. Additionally, during column-wise
embedding, the output of TFcol is progressively offloaded to CPU. As a result, we can see an incremental increase in CPU
memory usage throughout this stage.
We can also see that enabling automatic mixed precision highly reduces both memory consumption and computation time.
22

=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
0 50 100 150 200 250
Time (s)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
CPU Memory (GB)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
GPU Memory (GB)
Column-wise 
  embedding Row-wise interaction
Dataset-wise ICL
(a) CPU and GPU Memory Usage without Automatic Mixed Precision
0 20 40 60 80
Time (s)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
CPU Memory (GB)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
GPU Memory (GB)
Column-wise embedding
Dataset-wise ICL
Row-wise interaction
(b) CPU and GPU Memory Usage with Automatic Mixed Precision
Figure E.4. CPU and GPU memory consumption during inference for a dataset with 500K samples and 500 features. The relatively
high CPU memory consumption can be largely mitigated by optional disk offloading via memory mapping.
23

=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
E.3. Hierarchical Class-extension Strategy
Due to pretraining limitations, TabICL cannot natively handle classification problems with more than 10 classes. To address
this, we employ hierarchical classification to extend the class scalability of TabICL. This involves building a multi-level
classification tree where:
1. Each internal node splits the classes assigned to it into at most 10 child groups.
2. Recursion stops when a node contains ≤ 10 classes, turning it into a leaf.
Since each split reduces the class count by at least a factor of 10, the tree depth r =
l
log10 k
m
, where k denotes the total
number of classes.
Within the tree, each internal node predicts the probabilities of its child groups, while each leaf predicts the probabilities of
the classes it contains. For any given class c, the unique path from the root to its containing leaf can be represented by a
sequence of nodes:
g0(c) = root, g 1(c), g 2(c), . . . , gr−1(c), g r(c) = c
where gi(c) denotes the node at depth i on the path leading to class c. Applying the probability chain rule along the path
yields the overall posterior probability:
p

y = c | x

=
rY
i=1
p

gi(c)
 gi−1(c), x, Dgi−1(c)

(7)
where x is the given test sample, and Dgi−1(c) represents the training data associated with the node gi−1(c). Note that the
targets in Dgi−1(c) are the child group indices for the node gi−1(c).
F. Excluded Development Datasets of TabPFNv2
TabPFNv2 utilized several development datasets for hyperparameter tuning (e.g., learning rate, prior-related parameters),
early stopping to prevent overfitting by monitoring performance on these datasets, and model selection to identify the
best-performing model among multiple candidates. These development datasets are provided in the supplementary material
of TabPFNv2 (Hollmann et al., 2025).
For a fair comparison, we excluded these development datasets from the main paper. In the table below, we report the
performance of several high-performing methods on the development datasets included in the TALENT benchmark:
Table F.1. Performance on 15 development datasets of TabPFNv2
Dataset TabICL TabPFNv2 TabR ModernNCA RealMLP TabM CatBoost
Acc. AUC LogL Acc. AUC LogL Acc. AUC LogL Acc. AUC LogL Acc. AUC LogL Acc. AUC LogL Acc. AUC LogL
allbp 0.973 0.975 0.081 0.978 0.978 0.070 0.970 0.915 0.150 0.971 0.969 0.093 0.971 0.845 0.145 0.974 0.910 0.252 0.978 0.942 0.070
baseball 0.933 0.963 0.160 0.940 0.969 0.155 0.947 0.965 0.171 0.927 0.951 0.207 0.937 0.899 0.248 0.943 0.964 0.155 0.939 0.965 0.157
delta ailerons 0.952 0.981 0.161 0.954 0.982 0.159 0.948 0.978 0.175 0.949 0.980 0.165 0.945 0.976 0.184 0.950 0.979 0.172 0.948 0.979 0.164
eye movements 0.639 0.822 0.757 0.788 0.930 0.488 0.970 0.996 0.184 0.986 0.998 0.090 0.767 0.900 0.626 0.994 1.000 0.043 0.719 0.883 0.623
eye movements bin 0.588 0.648 0.655 0.678 0.751 0.597 0.659 0.732 1.344 0.909 0.974 0.207 0.596 0.639 2.244 0.593 0.628 0.668 0.615 0.672 0.642
heloc 0.720 0.799 0.545 0.726 0.803 0.543 0.722 0.795 0.555 0.721 0.797 0.547 0.722 0.798 0.551 0.718 0.789 0.557 0.723 0.799 0.544
hill-valley 0.785 0.917 0.518 0.983 0.992 0.098 0.700 0.732 0.571 0.781 0.804 1.455 0.796 0.852 0.547 0.512 0.529 0.703 0.517 0.515 0.693
JapaneseV owels 0.997 1.000 0.011 0.997 1.000 0.008 0.996 1.000 0.016 0.996 1.000 0.013 0.994 1.000 0.113 0.993 1.000 0.051 0.983 1.000 0.048
led24 0.731 0.953 0.812 0.732 0.956 0.780 0.738 0.949 0.885 0.732 0.955 0.973 0.734 0.954 0.827 0.734 0.958 0.793 0.735 0.956 0.962
national-longitudinal 0.998 1.000 0.005 1.000 1.000 0.000 0.994 1.000 0.029 0.999 1.000 0.003 0.995 0.996 0.064 1.000 1.000 0.000 1.000 1.000 0.012
page-blocks 0.976 0.993 0.092 0.975 0.993 0.092 0.968 0.987 0.127 0.967 0.989 0.129 0.971 0.980 0.162 0.968 0.985 0.127 0.967 0.991 0.110
ringnorm 0.980 0.997 0.066 0.980 0.997 0.055 0.980 0.995 0.075 0.980 0.996 0.072 0.976 0.996 0.079 0.980 0.997 0.062 0.971 0.995 0.083
rl 0.763 0.853 0.472 0.860 0.937 0.322 0.878 0.934 0.334 0.837 0.916 0.378 0.747 0.824 0.548 0.787 0.869 0.552 0.786 0.863 0.463
thyroid-ann 0.987 0.999 0.028 0.995 1.000 0.017 0.986 0.996 0.068 0.987 0.996 0.088 0.992 0.998 0.087 0.992 1.000 0.024 0.995 1.000 0.012
waveform-5000 0.872 0.978 0.259 0.865 0.977 0.263 0.860 0.975 0.310 0.862 0.975 0.278 0.867 0.975 0.291 0.862 0.976 0.279 0.860 0.973 0.297
G. Random Forest Extension of TabPFNv2 for Large Datasets
Hollmann et al. (2025) proposed an extension of TabPFNv2 using random forest (RF) to enhance its performance on large
datasets. During training, the extension recursively partitions the feature space using standard decision tree splitting criteria.
24

=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
At inference time, instead of relying on simple majority voting at the leaves, it fits TabPFNv2 to the subset of training data
that reaches each leaf. This extension not only leverages the inductive biases of tree-based models but also reduces the
number of samples processed by TabPFNv2, thereby mitigating its scalability limitations.
The ensemble prediction of this RF extension involves two main steps: (1) routing each test sample through all trees to
their corresponding leaf nodes, and (2) aggregating the predictions from TabPFNv2 at these leaves by either averaging
probabilities or logits.
A key innovation of this RF extension is the adaptive pruning mechanism that dynamically determines whether to use parent
node predictions or leaf node predictions based on validation performance. This prevents overfitting and optimizes the tree
depth for each region of the feature space.
This extension is not exclusive to TabPFNv2 and can also be applied to other tabular foundation models like TabICL. We
evaluated this RF extension with adaptive pruning enabled for both TabPFNv2 and TabICL on large datasets with more than
10K samples. Additionally, we set the ensemble size for both TabPFNv2 and TabICL to 4, considering that random forest
already ensembles multiple decision trees. As shown in Figure G.1, the RF extension significantly improves the performance
of both TabPFNv2 and TabICL.
10152025
[7.70] TabR
[7.73] TabICL-RF
[8.08] RealMLP
[8.68] TabM
[9.17] TabPFNv2-RF
[9.42] ModernNCA
[9.85] TabICL
[10.72] CatBoost
[11.81] MLP-PLR
[12.74] FT-T
[12.75] XGBoost
[13.26] LightGBM
[13.43] TabPFNv2
[14.30] DCNv2
[14.75] MLP
[15.11] AutoInt
[15.28] LoCalPFN
SwitchT [28.72]
LogReg [26.23]
GrowNet [26.21]
TabPFN [26.15]
TabNet [25.17]
KNN [24.92]
TuneTables [24.70]
TabT [22.66]
NODE [22.04]
RForest [22.04]
TANGOS [20.60]
TabCaps [19.34]
DANets [18.77]
PTaRL [16.43]
SNN [16.17]
ExcelF [15.91]
ResNet [15.60]
Figure G.1. Critical difference diagram (based on accuracy) on 53 large datasets with more than 10K samples. For TabICL-RF and
TabPFNv2-RF, the ”RF” suffix indicates the use of the random forest extension.
H. Effect of Ensemble Size on TabPFNv2 and TabICL
Both TabPFNv2 and TabICL break column-order invariance to mitigate the learning collapse problem, as described
in Section 3.3. To approximately restore permutation invariance, they aggregate predictions across multiple column
permutations, while also using different preprocessors and shuffling class labels. We analyze the effect of ensemble size on
their performance, as shown in Figure H.1. Our findings indicate that TabPFNv2 shows a clear improvement even with a
small ensemble size (≤ 4), whereas TabICL requires a larger ensemble size (≥ 8) for a noticeable performance gain.
Overall, TabPFNv2 benefits more from ensembling than TabICL. This could be attributed to :
• TabPFNv2 employs more sophisticated preprocessing operations compared to TabICL.
• TabPFNv2 benefits more from column permutations inherently. Unlike TabICL, TabPFNv2 never collapses the column
dimension. This means permuting columns could have a more pronounced impact on the outputs of TabPFNv2, which
reduces the correlation between ensemble members of TabPFNv2, thereby improving the effectiveness of ensembling.
25

=== PDF PAGE 26 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
1 2 4 8 16 32
Ensemble size E
-0.2%
0.0%
0.2%
0.4%
0.6%
0.8%
1.0%
Rel. accuracy improvements over E = 1
0.00%
0.18% 0.24% 0.27% 0.30% 0.26%
0.00%
0.32%
0.64% 0.68% 0.74% 0.76%
TabPFNv2
Mean
Median
(a) TabPFNv2
1 2 4 8 16 32
Ensemble size E
-0.2%
0.0%
0.2%
0.4%
0.6%
0.8%
1.0%
Rel. accuracy improvements over E = 1
0.00% 0.00% 0.06% 0.10% 0.15% 0.15%0.00%
0.10%
0.44%
0.61%
0.72% 0.75%
TabICL
Mean
Median (b) TabICL
Figure H.1. Effect of ensemble size on TabPFNv2 and TabICL. The figures show the relative accuracy improvements of different
ensemble sizes over no ensembling across 171 datasets with at most 10 classes.
I. Average Performance and Rankings
In this section, we present the average rank of all methods across different dataset categories, including binary datasets,
multi-class datasets (≤10 classes), small classification datasets (≤10K samples), and large classification datasets (>10K
samples). The rankings are computed based on accuracy, AUC, and Log Loss. The average rank is given in critical difference
diagrams, with Wilcoxon-Holm tests with a significance level 0.05. The lower the rank value, the better the performance.
It is important to note that accuracy is used as the objective metric for hyperparameter tuning in tabular methods. Moreover,
LoCalPFN (Thomas et al., 2024) and TuneTables (Feuer et al., 2024) are only included in the accuracy-based rankings.
26

=== PDF PAGE 27 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
7.510.012.515.017.520.022.525.0
[6.95] TabICL
[7.17] TabPFNv2
[9.46] TabR
[9.84] ModernNCA
[9.90] RealMLP
[10.11] TabM
[10.35] CatBoost
[10.67] LoCalPFN
[11.25] LightGBM
[12.09] XGBoost
[13.30] FT-T
[13.90] MLP-PLR
[14.55] DCNv2
[14.65] ResNet
[15.12] MLP
[15.64] AutoInt
TabNet [25.27]
SwitchT [24.99]
GrowNet [22.76]
KNN [20.86]
LogReg [20.63]
TabT [19.99]
NODE [19.16]
DANets [18.09]
PTaRL [17.22]
TANGOS [17.06]
TabCaps [16.83]
ExcelF [16.37]
TabPFN [16.31]
TuneTables [16.00]
RForest [15.92]
SNN [15.84]
(a) Accuracy
510152025
[5.59] TabICL
[5.99] TabPFNv2
[9.42] CatBoost
[9.75] ModernNCA
[9.89] TabM
[11.05] TabR
[11.39] LightGBM
[11.61] XGBoost
[12.37] RealMLP
[13.33] FT-T
[13.40] MLP-PLR
[13.89] TabPFN
[14.55] ResNet
[14.90] AutoInt
[14.91] MLP
TabNet [26.09]
SwitchT [24.58]
KNN [22.95]
GrowNet [22.06]
TabCaps [20.13]
LogReg [20.00]
TabT [19.45]
NODE [18.93]
DANets [18.12]
PTaRL [17.46]
TANGOS [16.59]
ExcelF [15.66]
DCNv2 [15.49]
SNN [15.16]
RForest [15.04]
(b) AUC
510152025
[4.21] TabICL
[4.47] TabPFNv2
[8.18] CatBoost
[10.76] ModernNCA
[10.89] TabM
[10.96] TabR
[11.86] FT-T
[12.41] LightGBM
[12.88] TabPFN
[13.63] AutoInt
[13.73] ExcelF
[14.71] ResNet
[14.90] XGBoost
[15.08] TANGOS
[15.24] RForest
KNN [25.80]
TabCaps [22.70]
TabNet [22.46]
SwitchT [21.80]
GrowNet [20.23]
DANets [20.11]
TabT [19.83]
NODE [19.15]
LogReg [17.92]
PTaRL [17.90]
MLP [17.26]
SNN [17.15]
DCNv2 [16.83]
MLP-PLR [16.10]
RealMLP [15.55]
(c) Log Loss
Figure I.1. Critical difference diagram for all 171 classification datasets (≤ 10 classes).
27

=== PDF PAGE 28 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
7.510.012.515.017.520.022.525.0
[6.32] TabICL
[7.10] TabPFNv2
[9.94] TabR
[10.30] LoCalPFN
[10.38] CatBoost
[10.43] ModernNCA
[10.74] TabM
[10.76] RealMLP
[10.96] LightGBM
[11.83] XGBoost
[13.22] FT-T
[13.87] MLP-PLR
[14.71] DCNv2
[15.15] AutoInt
[15.27] MLP
[15.31] TabPFN
TabNet [24.74]
SwitchT [24.51]
GrowNet [21.87]
KNN [21.52]
LogReg [20.49]
TabT [19.21]
DANets [17.99]
NODE [17.50]
TANGOS [16.87]
TabCaps [16.64]
ExcelF [16.22]
PTaRL [16.18]
SNN [16.12]
RForest [15.75]
ResNet [15.68]
TuneTables [15.47]
(a) Accuracy
510152025
[4.88] TabICL
[5.92] TabPFNv2
[9.68] CatBoost
[10.19] ModernNCA
[10.25] TabR
[10.62] TabM
[11.10] LightGBM
[11.51] XGBoost
[12.88] FT-T
[12.92] TabPFN
[12.98] RealMLP
[13.75] MLP-PLR
[14.55] RForest
[15.04] MLP
[15.12] AutoInt
TabNet [26.35]
SwitchT [24.22]
KNN [22.88]
GrowNet [21.60]
TabCaps [19.77]
TabT [19.58]
LogReg [19.47]
DANets [18.39]
NODE [17.65]
TANGOS [17.23]
PTaRL [17.01]
DCNv2 [15.95]
ExcelF [15.88]
SNN [15.59]
ResNet [15.46]
(b) AUC
510152025
[4.00] TabICL
[4.40] TabPFNv2
[8.65] CatBoost
[10.91] TabM
[11.04] ModernNCA
[11.15] TabR
[11.88] FT-T
[11.88] LightGBM
[12.58] TabPFN
[13.60] ExcelF
[13.70] AutoInt
[14.35] XGBoost
[14.54] RForest
[15.48] ResNet
[15.64] RealMLP
KNN [25.76]
TabCaps [23.58]
TabNet [22.47]
SwitchT [21.88]
DANets [20.42]
TabT [20.01]
GrowNet [19.81]
PTaRL [17.81]
NODE [17.73]
MLP [17.62]
SNN [17.39]
LogReg [17.31]
DCNv2 [17.08]
MLP-PLR [16.26]
TANGOS [15.86]
(c) Log Loss
Figure I.2. Critical difference diagram for 112 binary classification datasets.
28

=== PDF PAGE 29 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
7.510.012.515.017.520.022.525.0
[7.31] TabPFNv2
[8.14] TabICL
[8.27] RealMLP
[8.56] TabR
[8.71] ModernNCA
[8.90] TabM
[10.29] CatBoost
[11.37] LoCalPFN
[11.81] LightGBM
[12.58] XGBoost
[12.69] ResNet
[13.44] FT-T
[13.97] MLP-PLR
[14.25] DCNv2
[14.85] MLP
[15.29] SNN
TabNet [26.27]
SwitchT [25.90]
GrowNet [24.46]
NODE [22.31]
TabT [21.47]
LogReg [20.90]
KNN [19.61]
PTaRL [19.19]
DANets [18.27]
TabPFN [18.20]
TANGOS [17.42]
TabCaps [17.19]
TuneTables [17.00]
ExcelF [16.64]
AutoInt [16.58]
RForest [16.25]
(a) Accuracy
7.510.012.515.017.520.022.525.0
[6.13] TabPFNv2
[6.92] TabICL
[8.52] TabM
[8.92] CatBoost
[8.92] ModernNCA
[11.22] RealMLP
[11.80] XGBoost
[11.95] LightGBM
[12.57] TabR
[12.75] MLP-PLR
[12.85] ResNet
[14.18] FT-T
[14.35] SNN
[14.50] AutoInt
[14.62] DCNv2
TabNet [25.60]
SwitchT [25.27]
KNN [23.08]
GrowNet [22.92]
NODE [21.33]
LogReg [21.00]
TabCaps [20.82]
TabT [19.18]
PTaRL [18.32]
DANets [17.60]
RForest [15.97]
TabPFN [15.72]
TANGOS [15.38]
ExcelF [15.25]
MLP [14.67]
(b) AUC
510152025
[4.60] TabPFNv2
[4.60] TabICL
[7.28] CatBoost
[10.22] ModernNCA
[10.60] TabR
[10.85] TabM
[11.82] FT-T
[13.25] ResNet
[13.40] LightGBM
[13.45] TabPFN
[13.50] AutoInt
[13.60] TANGOS
[13.98] ExcelF
[15.38] RealMLP
[15.82] MLP-PLR
KNN [25.88]
TabNet [22.43]
NODE [21.83]
SwitchT [21.67]
TabCaps [21.05]
GrowNet [21.00]
DANets [19.52]
TabT [19.50]
LogReg [19.08]
PTaRL [18.07]
SNN [16.70]
MLP [16.58]
RForest [16.55]
DCNv2 [16.37]
XGBoost [15.93]
(c) Log Loss
Figure I.3. Critical difference diagram for 59 multi-class classification datasets (≤ 10 classes).
29

=== PDF PAGE 30 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
510152025
[5.07] TabPFNv2
[6.27] TabICL
[9.05] LoCalPFN
[10.31] ModernNCA
[10.76] CatBoost
[10.76] TabR
[10.87] LightGBM
[11.14] RealMLP
[11.34] TabM
[12.34] XGBoost
[12.57] TabPFN
[12.64] TuneTables
[13.98] RForest
[14.20] FT-T
[14.84] ResNet
[15.22] DCNv2
TabNet [26.12]
SwitchT [24.13]
GrowNet [21.92]
KNN [19.59]
TabT [19.32]
NODE [18.69]
LogReg [18.66]
DANets [18.41]
PTaRL [18.10]
ExcelF [17.32]
AutoInt [16.56]
TabCaps [16.34]
SNN [16.33]
TANGOS [16.24]
MLP [15.81]
MLP-PLR [15.47]
(a) Accuracy
510152025
[3.61] TabPFNv2
[4.65] TabICL
[9.89] TabPFN
[10.12] CatBoost
[10.72] TabM
[11.16] ModernNCA
[11.84] LightGBM
[12.33] XGBoost
[12.65] TabR
[12.73] RealMLP
[14.01] RForest
[14.29] MLP-PLR
[14.35] FT-T
[14.52] ResNet
[15.28] SNN
TabNet [27.50]
SwitchT [24.09]
KNN [21.93]
GrowNet [21.33]
TabCaps [20.03]
TabT [18.98]
PTaRL [18.81]
NODE [18.72]
DANets [18.47]
LogReg [18.34]
ExcelF [16.62]
DCNv2 [16.25]
AutoInt [16.05]
TANGOS [15.89]
MLP [15.29]
(b) AUC
510152025
[2.49] TabPFNv2
[3.38] TabICL
[8.28] CatBoost
[8.88] TabPFN
[11.19] TabM
[12.15] ModernNCA
[12.17] FT-T
[12.78] TabR
[13.24] LightGBM
[13.66] RForest
[13.69] AutoInt
[14.16] ExcelF
[14.81] TANGOS
[15.13] ResNet
[15.63] LogReg
KNN [24.52]
TabNet [23.41]
TabCaps [22.69]
DANets [21.02]
SwitchT [20.78]
NODE [19.83]
TabT [19.46]
GrowNet [19.43]
PTaRL [19.15]
MLP [17.92]
DCNv2 [17.78]
MLP-PLR [17.35]
SNN [17.03]
XGBoost [16.52]
RealMLP [16.16]
(c) Log Loss
Figure I.4. Critical difference diagram for 116 small classification datasets (≤ 10K samples).
30

=== PDF PAGE 31 ===
TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for Large Data
7.510.012.515.017.520.022.525.027.5
[6.79] TabR
[7.17] RealMLP
[7.60] TabM
[8.51] ModernNCA
[8.64] TabICL
[9.68] CatBoost
[10.58] MLP-PLR
[11.49] FT-T
[11.64] XGBoost
[11.94] TabPFNv2
[12.02] LightGBM
[12.96] DCNv2
[13.38] MLP
[13.72] AutoInt
[13.96] LoCalPFN
[14.15] ResNet
SwitchT [26.91]
LogReg [24.55]
GrowNet [24.51]
TabPFN [24.30]
TabNet [23.38]
KNN [23.26]
TuneTables [22.92]
TabT [21.09]
NODE [20.43]
RForest [20.36]
TANGOS [18.94]
TabCaps [17.68]
DANets [17.25]
PTaRL [15.00]
SNN [14.77]
ExcelF [14.45]
(a) Accuracy
7.510.012.515.017.520.022.525.0
[6.49] ModernNCA
[7.67] TabICL
[7.85] TabR
[8.13] CatBoost
[8.44] TabM
[10.24] XGBoost
[10.29] LightGBM
[11.18] TabPFNv2
[11.42] FT-T
[11.55] MLP-PLR
[11.62] RealMLP
[12.56] AutoInt
[13.76] DCNv2
[13.85] MLP
[13.93] ExcelF
SwitchT [25.76]
KNN [24.89]
GrowNet [23.55]
LogReg [23.18]
TabNet [23.11]
TabPFN [22.02]
TabCaps [20.29]
TabT [20.09]
NODE [19.84]
TANGOS [18.07]
DANets [17.42]
RForest [17.05]
SNN [14.85]
ResNet [14.56]
PTaRL [14.47]
(b) AUC
510152025
[6.00] TabICL
[7.31] TabR
[7.58] ModernNCA
[8.13] CatBoost
[8.75] TabPFNv2
[10.58] LightGBM
[10.60] TabM
[11.38] FT-T
[11.76] XGBoost
[13.05] ExcelF
[13.49] MLP-PLR
[13.60] AutoInt
[13.76] ResNet
[14.16] RealMLP
[14.71] DCNv2
KNN [28.36]
SwitchT [23.98]
TabCaps [22.55]
LogReg [22.42]
GrowNet [21.89]
TabPFN [21.02]
TabNet [20.38]
TabT [20.35]
RForest [18.47]
DANets [18.33]
NODE [18.16]
SNN [17.56]
MLP [15.67]
TANGOS [15.65]
PTaRL [15.09]
(c) Log Loss
Figure I.5. Critical difference diagram for 53 large classification datasets (> 10K samples).
31